HF docs: verify Interacting with Mina (#652)
o1-labs/docs2: docs/zkapps/o1js/interact-with-mina.md

---
title: Interacting With Mina
hide_title: true

> description: How to create zero knowledge proofs and how users can call zkApp methods. An account update can have proof or signature authorizations.

Author: we have conflicting statements: proof, signature, AND none (or just proof or signature?) do we need an explainer?

> description: How to create zero knowledge proofs and how users can call zkApp methods. An account update can have proof or signature authorizations.

Author: ```suggestion
description: How to create zero knowledge proofs and how users can call zkApp methods. An account update can have proof, signature, or none authorizations.
```

# Interacting With Mina

Now that you know about writing zkApp methods, it's time to learn how users can call these methods. 

## Transactions

Recall that smart contracts execute off-chain. The result of an off-chain execution is a _transaction_ that can be sent to the Mina network to apply the changes made by the smart contract.

In this section, you learn what a transaction looks like and how to create one.

## Account updates

The fundamental data structure that Mina transactions are built from is called an _account update_. An account update always contains updates to one specific on-chain account. 

For example, if you transfer MINA from one account to another, the balance on two accounts is updated – the sender and the receiver. Therefore, sending MINA requires two account updates. 

Account updates are a flexible and powerful data structure that can express all kinds of updates, events, and preconditions you use to develop smart contracts.

> ### Transaction JSON object

Author: good call... isn't it interesting to see how things are consumed by different people!? thanks, coach!

});
```

In this example, the transaction calls a single `SmartContract` method called `myMethod`. You can inspect the transaction by printing the JSON data to the console:

```ts
console.log(tx.toJSON());
```

This command outputs a massive JSON object with many fields, most of which are set to their default value. 

### Transaction output

> Instead, it's better to output transactions in a more human-readable, condensed format to print only the fields with actual content:

Author: there is a lot of legacy "if you do this, it fails" content in the docs... should we remove in this case?

> Instead, it's better to output transactions in a more human-readable, condensed format to print only the fields with actual content:

Author: I hear ya... and I understand. For context, the other docs content that I considered legacy was the earlier versions of tutorial steps that said "run this command, but it will break" which are now rewritten

];
```

This output includes several essential things to learn about transactions.

The transaction output is an array with two entries: 

  - The account updates that make up this transaction
  - 'MyContract.myMethod()'` that corresponds to the method call you performed

> Account updates:

Reviewer: see https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/pull/652#discussion_r1361609448

  - The first update is always the fee payer, whose public key is passed in as `sender`. 
  - For the `fee`, which you didn't specify, the o1js default value of 0 is used
  - The `authorization` was filled with a dummy signature.
    
In a user-facing zkApp, you typically don't care about setting those values. Instead, you create a transaction like this in the browser and pass it on to the user's wallet. 

The wallet replaces your fee payer account with one that represents the user account, applying the user's settings for the fee. The `authorization` field is filled with a signature created from the user's private key. See [Connecting your zkApp with a user's wallet](/zkapps/how-to-write-a-zkapp-ui#connecting-your-zkapp-with-a-users-wallet).

The second account update has the `'MyContract.myMethod()'` label:

> - The update corresponds to the method call. An `@method` call always results in the creation of an account update – an update to the zkApp account itself. 

Author: You are right! https://developers.google.com/style/lists

  - `preconditions: { account: { state: [...] } }` – similar to the `update`, one entry per field of on-chain state for the preconditions created with `this.<state>.assertEquals()`. This example accepts transactions only if the first of the 8 state fields equals 0. The `null` values mean that no condition is set on the other 7 state fields.
  - `authorizationKind: 'Proof'` – indicates this account update must be authorized with a proof. Proof authorization is the default when calling a zkApp method, but not necessarily for other account updates.
  - `authorization: undefined` – the proof needed on this update isn't there yet. You learn how to add it in a minute.

Note that there are many more fields that account updates can have, but `tx.toPretty()` prints only the fields with actual content. Also, not all account updates must be present. For example, if a zkApp doesn't set a state, the `update` field might be missing. In that case, strictly speaking, it wouldn't always be an "update" in the sense that the account is modified. The term "account update" is used for simplicity.

> As you might have noticed, account updates aren't created in a very explicit manner. Instead, o1js gives you an imperative API, with "commands" like `state.set()`, to create and modify account updates in a transaction. 

Author: what is "imperative API" mentioned here? just that (what is it called?) our API requires the "commands" and doesn't imply anything?

In the end, the entire transaction is sent to the network as one atomic update. If something fails – for example, one of the account updates has insufficient authorization – the _entire_ transaction is rejected and doesn't get applied. This is in contrast to an EVM contract, where the initial steps of a method call could succeed even if the method fails at a later step.

## Creating proofs

> To create zero-knowledge proofs:

Author: ```suggestion
Finally, here's how to create zero-knowledge proofs!
```

> To create zero-knowledge proofs:

Author: We use second person pronoun "you" so the r/w was to avoid using 'we' 
https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/wiki/Docs-Style-Guide#language-and-grammar 

I've put the fun back in!

await tx.prove(); // this might take a while
```

This example code include two new operations:

- `MyContract.compile()` creates prover and verification keys from your smart contract. You must create the keys before you can create any proofs.

>   - The name `compile()` is a metaphor for what this function does: creating prover and verifier functions from your code. It doesn't refer to literal "compilation" of JS into a circuit representation. The circuit representation of your code is created by _executing_ it, not by compiling it. Also, the prover function still includes the execution of your JS code as one step.

Author: Motivation: accessibility, readability. Style guidance https://developers.google.com/style/footnotes 

I agree, let's not bury the super essentials in the ramble. But let's do avoid footnotes. Let me tag you in a bit on an update

(btw, I am really enjoying learning from you in this very thorough doc review, thank you!)

>   - The name `compile()` is a metaphor for what this function does: creating prover and verifier functions from your code. It doesn't refer to literal "compilation" of JS into a circuit representation. The circuit representation of your code is created by _executing_ it, not by compiling it. Also, the prover function still includes the execution of your JS code as one step.

Reviewer: I agree that readability would be hurt if the text was littered with footnotes. But I can't see how a single footnote presents a problem in that regard.
This is non-essential info (that's why it's in a footnote), so not being accessible is not really a concern IMO.

];
```

## How proofs link to account updates

You might wonder: what, exactly, is proved? How is the proof linked to the account update it is part of?

The proof attests to two different things:

- The execution of `myMethod()`
- The public input of that execution

Recall that all method arguments are _private inputs_. So, the verifier doesn't get to see them, and the proof doesn't say anything about them (it only says that there were _some_ private inputs that satisfied all constraints). However, a zk proof can also have a public input. 

In the case of zkApps, **the public input is the account update** that is passed in implicitly with `tx.prove()`. The prover function (smart contract logic) creates its own account update and constrains it to equal the public input.

The public input is data that is shared between the prover and verifier:

- The verifier passes in the public input when verifying it.
- The proof is valid only if it was created with _the same public input_. 

The proof attests to the validity of exactly this account update. If you change the account update before sending it to the Mina network, the proof is no longer valid. 

> The only valid account updates for a zkApp account are the ones created according to the logic of your `SmartContract`. This core concept is why zkApp smart contracts execute on the client side.

Author: is there a reason to use code literal here? Is the code always `SmartContract`? or we can just use plain text?

> your `SmartContract`

> The only valid account updates for a zkApp account are the ones created according to the logic of your `SmartContract`. This core concept is why zkApp smart contracts execute on the client side.

Author: ```suggestion
The only valid account updates for a zkApp account are the ones created according to the logic of your smart contract. This core concept is why zkApp smart contracts execute on the client side.
```

:::info

> MINA amounts, in all o1js APIs and elsewhere in the protocol, are always denominated in nanoMINA = `10^(-9)` MINA (which is why we set `const MINA = 1e9`).

Author: what does this mean? do we need to include it? and can we link somewhere to explain it?

> (which is why we set `const MINA = 1e9`).

> MINA amounts, in all o1js APIs and elsewhere in the protocol, are always denominated in nanoMINA = `10^(-9)` MINA (which is why we set `const MINA = 1e9`).

Author: ```suggestion
MINA amounts, in all o1js APIs and elsewhere in the protocol, are always denominated in nanoMINA = `10^(-9)` MINA, which is why you set `const MINA = 1e9`.
```

:::

> The transaction now has these account updates:

Author: I didn't see three updates, I saw two... so I changed the word here. Is two accurate?

> The transaction now has these account updates:

Author: ```suggestion
The transaction now has three account updates:
```

];
```

- The zkApp update with label `'MyContract.payout()'` has a negative `balanceChange` of 5 billion (= 5 MINA). This makes sense, because you are sending MINA away from the zkApp account.
- An additional account update has a corresponding positive balance change – the user account that receives MINA.

Two quick observations:

- You didn't explicitly create the receiver account update. It was created, and attached to the transaction, by calling `this.send()`. 

  o1js tries to abstract away the low-level language of account updates where possible and give you intuitive commands to create the right ones. However, you might sometimes have to create account updates explicitly.

- The user update has `authorizationKind: 'None_given'`. That means the update is not authorized. This is possible because it doesn't include any changes that require authorization: It just receives MINA. You can send someone MINA without their permission.

In general, there are three kinds of authorizations that an account update can have: a proof, a signature, or none. We'll learn about signatures in the next section. You can find more details in [our docs about permissions](TODO).

> - Proof authorization – used for zkApp accounts when you do an `@method` call. Proofs are verified against the on-chain verification key.
> - Signature authorization – used to update user accounts. Signatures are verified against the account's public key.
> - No authorization – used on updates which don't require authorization. For example, positive balance changes.

Reviewer: As mentioned [here](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/pull/652#discussion_r1361706865) I think we should remove this
```suggestion
```

Concretely, in this example, both the zkApp account update and the user account update are public input to the zkApp method call. 

Intuitively, the public input means that the zkApp can "see" and constrain the update as part of its proof. Here, it means that no one can change the public key of the receiver, or amount they receive, without making the proof invalid. 

The update can contain only what the method specified.

All of this is true because `this.send()` placed the receiver update at call depth 1, under the zkApp update. 

As a counter example: The fee payer is never part of the public input. It can be anything without affecting the validity of the proof.

A key takeaway is: If you want something to become part of your proof, you must put it inside your `@method`.

## Signing transactions and explicit account updates

To recap the workflow covered so far: You write a smart contract, and then create a transaction to call the smart contract. The workflow of this transaction consists of account updates that are created by o1js. 

The next example explicitly creates an account update and shows how to use signatures for authorizing updates to user accounts.

> To continue the [Payment to zkApp example](#payment-to-zkapp-example) in the other direction: make a deposit from the user into the zkApp. 

Author: Right, as soon as we focus the content on what the user is doing, we know to speak to them directly "you" (because we are not there with them). It's a thing.

}
```

To unpack what happens here, the first line of the method creates a new, empty account update for the sender account:

```ts
let senderUpdate = AccountUpdate.create(this.sender);
```

- `AccountUpdate` is the class in o1js that represents account udpates. 
- `AccountUpdate.create()` instantiates this class and attaches the update to the current transaction at the same level where `create` is called. 

> If it is called inside an `@method`, the `AccountUpdate` is created as a child (public input) of the zkApp update.

Reviewer: This belongs into the second bullet point above; "it" refers to `AccountUpdate.create()`

> - `AccountUpdate.create()` instantiates this class and attaches the update to the current transaction at the same level where `create` is called. 
> 
> If it is called inside an `@method`, the `AccountUpdate` is created as a child (public input) of the zkApp update.

Author: ```suggestion
- `AccountUpdate.create()` instantiates this class and attaches the update to the current transaction at the same level where `create` is called. 

    If it is called inside an `@method`, the `AccountUpdate` is created as a child (public input) of the zkApp update.
```

];
```

The third account update is the one created with `AccountUpdate.create()`. 

Two changes to the update were caused by calling `requireSignature()`:

- `useFullCommitment: true`, not explained here but has to do with replay protection when using signatures.
- `authorizationKind: 'Signature'`

Finally, `authorization: undefined` indicates that the signature is not provided yet.

> In a user-facing zkApp, user signatures are typically added by a wallet, not within o1js. In that case, the missing signature is expected. However, to use node for testing and calling zkApps, you must add the signatures with `tx.sign([...privateKeys])`, called after `Mina.transaction` on the finished transaction. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a user-facing zkApp, user signatures are typically added by a wallet, not within o1js. In that case, the missing signature is expected. However, in tests or when calling zkApps from a Node.js script, you must add the signatures with `tx.sign([...privateKeys])`, called after `Mina.transaction` on the finished transaction. 
```

tx.sign([senderPrivateKey]); // senderKey is a PrivateKey
```

- The example shows how to derive the sender's public key, `sender`, from its private key, `senderPrivateKey`.
- `.sign()` goes through the transaction and adds signatures on all account updates that:
  
    - Need a signature
    - Whose public key matches one of the private keys that were provided 
  
  `.sign()` takes an array, so you could provide multiple private keys for signing. 

In this example, two account updates are signed with `tx.sign()`: The fee payer and the depositor account update. Both have the `sender` public key on them that matches `senderPrivateKey.toPublicKey()`.

:::tip
o1js allows you to load and store private and public keys in Base58 format. 

> :::

Reviewer: I think the code below should be part of this tip! Otherwise it is ripped from context

Author: hmmm... "ripped from content" we don't want that.

I am persuaded

> :::

Author: ```suggestion
```

:::tip
o1js allows you to load and store private and public keys in Base58 format. 
:::

o1js allows you to load and store private and public keys in base58 format. Here's how the sender private key might be created in a script:
To create the sender private key in a script:

```ts
const senderPrivateKey = PrivateKey.fromBase58('EKEQc95...');

> ```

Reviewer: the backticks here are needed to end the code example, should be put back

Reviewer: @barriebyron might this be the reason why it fails to deploy?

Author: you are right! thank you, coach

> In a real server-side deployment, you probably want to load keys from a file or environment variable, instead of hard-coding them in your source code.

Author: ```suggestion
In a real server-side deployment, you probably want to load keys from a file or environment variable, instead of hard-coding them in your source code.
:::
```

> Recall that account updates can have three types of authorization:

Author: we have more than three, right? Do we want to summarize here and link to https://docs.minaprotocol.com/zkapps/o1js/permissions#types-of-authorizations ?

Reviewer: No, the list in the Permissions docs is a slightly different notion of authorization types. What we discuss here are types of authorization that an account update can have, and the list of three below is exhaustive

await tx.send();
```

The output of `tx.send()` can be used to:

- Wait for inclusion of this transaction in a block

> - To get the transaction hash, which lets you look up the pending transaction on a block explorer

Reviewer: shouldn't this be

```suggestion
- Get the transaction hash, which lets you look up the pending transaction on a block explorer
```

// our account updates are applied on chain!
```

In addition to `Mina.Metwork`, you can also use a mocked "Mina instance" for local testing:

```ts
const Local = Mina.LocalBlockchain();
Mina.setActiveInstance(Local);
```

> Doing this means setting up a fresh, local ledger that is pre-filled with a couple of accounts with funds that you have access to. "Sending" a transaction here just means applying your account updates to that local Mina instance. This is helpful for testing, especially because account updates go through the same validation logic locally that they would on-chain.

Author: do we want to provide more details here? what does it mean to set up a local ledger?

Reviewer: The "ledger" is the list of accounts on the blockchain. Setting up a local ledger means creating a list of accounts on the developer's machine, in memory, instead of on an actual blockchain.

I don't think that explanation needs to be added, though.

> Fun fact: The `LocalBlockchain` instance literally uses the same OCaml code for transaction validation and application that the Mina node uses; it's compiled to JS with [js_of_ocaml](https://github.com/ocsigen/js_of_ocaml).

Reviewer: Don't we use footnotes? 😅 Like the one above, this feels more like footnote content to me (but having it in the main text works as well, in this case)

Author: no footnotes, please :)
